---
aliases: equity, equitable
---

From Oxford Languages, equity as a noun is the quality of being [[fairness|fair]] and impartial. Alternatively, equity represents the value of shares issued by a company, or the valuation of property after charges have been deducted against it. Lastly, an Equity card is a token which grants union rights to working actors. Literal actors, that is.

Funny how to be an actor implies an adoption of the a hyper-real state of being. Actors seem to be asked to pretend, but pretned with all the pieces of their being they can muster to the surface of themselves. They craft masks for themselves throughout their [[performance]], sometimes literally wearing a mask. Many people need to wear masks in order to get by under white supremacy. Layers and layers of privelege coalesce into experience and passage through the world. Sometimes a person's layers collide with those of another person. And sometimes the experiences of one somebody are so painfully different from another's, understanding and [[knowledge]] is hypothetically impossible. 

Paradoxically, the human experience shares myriad things -- laughter, preference, dreams, fear of change. Those commonalities can be celebrated, and indeed, part of the celebration often involves community building. But this joyful shared experience has been delayed in universal fullfillment for several reasons.

Under white supremacy, the experiences and desires of many groups are jeopardized by the existence (and sometimes direct action) of the supremely priveleged. Poor white people need to understand that universally, they occupy a position of more privelege than poor Black people, poor Latinx people. Poverty is not such an equalizer as some texts on solidarity would have us believe. This does not excuse the instigators of poverty -- far from it, we will get to capital in *just a minute*. And while the frustration and despair felt by poor white people at their disenfranchisement and marginalization by a neoliberal body politic is valid and heard, that frustration gives absolutely no one the right to exact revenge on a stranger. Outside of the church, poor white folks seem to historically lack the connections of shared responsibility and collective action which would humanize each other, and reveal paths out of their racist thoughts. 

As I write this, I am thinking of the murder of Ahmaud Arbery. And this is painful to think of, because his muder was horrific. And I am reminded of Mariame Kaba's story about justice, and a strange planet away from Earth, where murderers are forced to live in the space of the person whose life they took, become that person for a while, until one day they are brought to the brink of death, and the murdered person's family may decide to save them, or let them go. Punishment would cease to exist were the murderer to be let free. But in this way, the choice would ultimately be left to the people whose opinions matter the most, the victim's loved ones. In this way, a community member would never be alone, never be without a party to which they were directly responsible. Acts are thus never committed without [[eyewitnesses]].

Equity can be [[measurement|measured]] like a tally sheet under many different contexts. How personhood is decided; how to compensate labor; how to measure space for living. Distilling life to numbers is an old game, and according to David Graeber, has been practiced for at least some 5000 years. Graeber writes of ancient tribes and organizations who maintained that [[debt]] can only be satisfied in full upon exchange of objects with equal value. This feels reminiscent of Hamurabi, where one eye could only be exchanged with another. The demand for a debt to be satisfied necessitated some agreed-upon price and [[time|time-frame]] for satisfaction. Initially this was decided on the small scale of agreements between two community members, perhaps arbitrated by a third (and presumably neutral) party, or a fourth, being the chorus of family members and friends who held their beloved object's best interests to heart. As needs, services, and geotemporal considerations evolved, so too did the frameworks under which debt arbitration (and indeed punishment) were resolved. A state emerged. In some places, a class system emerged as well. [[power]] evolved as well.

When we think about the figure of the power-broker, what comes to mind? The image of a monarch? A white man in a crown and ermine-trimmed cape? Maybe a squat white woman with a sash and scepter, looking billiously into the camera lens. 