Qualifiers put the onus in the wrong quarter. [Matuschak says](https://notes.andymatuschak.org/Literature_notes_are_secondary_and_separate?stackedNotes=zhmLXArqiCMDr9Q13ViqN3hh3SmrKzjQxWAr&stackedNotes=z7kEFe6NfUSgtaDuUjST1oczKKzQQeQWk4Dbc) that taking [[note|notes]] is the most obvious part of creating [[knowledge]]. By this, they mean that it is the easiest part to emulate or modify. When you have no clue about what to make, it is so easy to be swept away with the how's; the what's remain shadowy [[dreams|dream]] shapes. The chunk of [[time|time]] between when you *begin* and when you actualize the idea can stretch, be stretched further still by fiddling with the systems you use to research, and read and yes, take notes.

However, the claim that such speculation is unhelpful is in itself unhelpful! It's true that only ever working with the support system and never the real thing can be tiresome. The time spent in one direction might prove fruitless. But Matuschak's point is elitist. A new creative *should* take as much time as they like trying new things. When they find something that *really gets them going,* the writing (or painting, or speaking, or filming or *whatever*) will come. This isn't wasted time, it is exposure. It can be joy. The act of creation is no less than an act of the god in each of us, of the child in each of us, a wellspring of insight and feeling that enriches our lived experience. We are born as all-god, all-child. As we grow, we are conditioned to hold this holiness (for lack of a better word) in check, some of us to a much lesser extent than others. The claim that "better thinking" is all that matters misses the point entirely. We can grow beyond our conditioning, and when that happens, we create. 