In obsidian, can I view multiple folders in graph-view? How are the lengths between [[nodes-antinodes|nodes]] decided? How are vaults different from folders?

I'd like to start keeping a journal here, but store it in a separate folder. I imagine they'd be less task-focused than my calendar entries, but still tracked by day. Maybe this is another use case for a template file. For the template files, what path do I need to attribute to use them? Like, there is currently a template file in my directory for obsidian. It's next to the vault all-thoughts-mapped. I'm even *on* a branch for writing a templates file. I just need to figure out how to call those. All obsidian files are `.md`, so do I need to like, generate a bibtex file will callable document classes? And if so, do I need to set up like a yaml/toml dependencies env? This probably isn't nearly as hard as I am making it out to be.

Another instance of me, thinking I need to do something, and the promptly forgetting I needed/wanted to do it.

Anyways --

Today I'll be focusing on:

-  finishing up reading paper on [[legality-of-fairness]]
-  some [[quantum-mechanics]] problems
-  ~~meeting with AD regarding [[fairness]] brainstorming
	-  TODO identify 1-3 [[algorithm|algorithms]] to work on
- going to try to work on [[coffee-resource-partners]] and if that finishes quickly, transition to [[coffee-shop-market-research]]
- i'd like to follow up on [[regression-analysis]] article as well, but this is a lot already so we'll see
- working on [[birthday-party]] to learn about git-controlling a single-page HTML site
- turning on [[kanban]] plugin and migrate list of blog topics from physical notebook
- add dei ep resources to gh links

#journal #to-do